balasametabalānugato bhavān puramagāhata bhīṣmakamānita: |
dvijasutaṃ tvadupāgamavādinaṃ dhṛtarasā tarasā praṇanāma sā ||1||
bhuvanakāntamavekṣya bhavadvapurnṛpasutasya niśamya ca ceṣṭitam |
vipulakhedajuṣāṃ puravāsināṃ saruditairuditairagamanniśā ||2||
bala-sameta-	along with an army
bala-anugata:	by Balaraam followed
bhavān	(were) Thou
puram-agāhata	the city of (Kundina) entered
bhīṣmaka-mānita:	Bhishmaka honoured (Thee and Balaraam)
dvija-sutaṃ	to the Braahmin boy
tvat-upāgama-vādinaṃ	who Thy coming had announced
dhṛtarasā tarasā	with joy at once
praṇanāma sā	prostrated she (Rukmini)
tadanu vanditumindumukhī śivāṃ vihitamaṅgalabhūṣaṇabhāsurā |
niragamat bhavadarpitajīvitā svapurata: purata: subhaṭāvṛtā ||3||
bhuvana-kāntam-avekṣya	in the world most beautiful (Thee) seeing
bhavat-vapu:-	Thy form
nṛpa-sutasya	the king's son's (Rukmi's)
niśamya ca ceṣṭitam	hearing the effort
vipula-kheda-juṣām	great sorrow overcome with
pura-vāsināṃ	the public (of Kundina)
saruditai:-uditai:-	with tears speaking about
agamat-niśā	spent the night
The public of Kundina saw Thy most beautiful form in the world, and heard about the ill effort of Rukmi, the king's son. They were smitten with great sorrow with the state of affairs in the city and spent a sleepless night sadly and tearfully talking about it all.
kulavadhūbhirupetya kumārikā girisutāṃ paripūjya ca sādaram |
muhurayācata tatpadapaṅkaje nipatitā patitāṃ tava kevalam ||4||
tadanu vanditum-	then to worship
indumukhī śivāṃ	the moon faced (Rukmini), Paarvati
vihita-maṅgala-	adorning auspicious
bhūṣaṇa-bhāsurā	ornaments (and attire) shining
niragamat	came out
bhavat-arpita-jīvitā	to Thee having dedicated her life
svapurata: purata:	of her chambers, in front
subhaṭa-āvṛtā	by guards surrounded
Then, the next morning, the moon faced beauty Rukmini, who had already dedicated her life to Thee, came out of her chambers to worship Paarvati. She was bedecked with auspicious ornaments and attire and was well surrounded by the guards.
samavalokakutūhalasaṅkule nṛpakule nibhṛtaṃ tvayi ca sthite |
nṛpasutā niragādgirijālayāt suruciraṃ rucirañjitadiṅmukhā ||5||
kula-vadhubhi:-upetya	with the noble women reaching
kumārikā	the princess
girisutāṃ paripūjya	Paarvati worshipped with fervour
ca sādaram	and with reverence
muhu:-ayācata	again and again prayed
tat-pada-paṅkaje	on her lotus feet
nipatitā	prostrating
patitāṃ tava kevalaṃ	as husband Thee only
The princess reached the temple of goddess Paarvati in the company of noble women. With great reverence and fervour she worshipped the goddess and prostrated at her feet praying again and again that Thou alone be her husband.
bhuvanamohanarūparucā tadā vivaśitākhilarājakadambayā |
tvamapi deva kaṭākṣavimokṣaṇai: pramadayā madayāñcakṛṣe manāk ||6||
samavaloka-	the sight (of Rukmini)
kutūhala-saṅkule	expecting (to see) joyfully gathered
nṛpa-kule	the assembly of kings
nibhṛtaṃ tvayi	silently aloof when Thou
ca sthite	and were standing
nṛpa-sutā niragāt-	the princess came out
girijā-ālayāt	from goddess Paarvati's temple
suruciraṃ	in a charming manner
rucira-rañjita-	brilliantly lighting
dik-mukhā	the quarters
The assembly of kings had gathered joyfully with the expectation to see Rukmini. Thou stood among them in a silently aloof manner. Just then the princess came out of the temple of goddess Paarvati, in a charming manner causing the quarters to light up with her brilliance.
kvanu gamiṣyasi candramukhīti tāṃ sarasametya kareṇa haran kṣaṇāt |
samadhiropya rathaṃ tvamapāhṛthā bhuvi tato vitato ninado dviṣām ||7||
bhuvana-mohana-	the world enchanting
rūpa-rucā tadā	beauty enthralling then
vivaśita-akhila-	bewitched the entire
rāja-kadambayā	king's assembly
tvam-api deva	Thou also O Lord!
kaṭākṣa-vimokṣaṇai:	by sidelong glances casting
pramadayā	by the enchanting one (Rukmini)
madayān-cakṛṣe	were enchanted
manāk	somewhat
Then the enthralling beauty Rukmini bewitched the entire assembly of kings gathered there. Thou also, O Lord! Were somewhat enchanted by her as she cast her sidelong glances.
kva nu gata: paśupāla iti krudhā kṛtaraṇā yadubhiśca jitā nṛpā: |
na tu bhavānudacālyata tairaho piśunakai: śunakairiva kesarī ||8||
kvanu gamiṣyasi	where indeed are you going
candramukhī-iti	O Moon faced one! Thus
tāṃ sarasam-etya	her quickly reaching
kareṇa haran kṣaṇāt	by hand leading away instantly
samadhiropya rathaṃ	helping her in the chariot
tvam-apāhṛthā	Thou carried away
bhuvi tata: vitata:	all over the earth then spreading
ninada: dviṣām	loud protest among the enemies
Addressing her admiringly, Thou asked her, 'O moon-faced one! where indeed are you going?' Thou hastily reached her and holding her by her arm Thou led her to the chariot and helping her in it, Thou carried her away. Whereupon there spread a loud protest among Thy rivals.
tadanu rukmiṇamāgatamāhave vadhamupekṣya nibadhya virūpayan |
hṛtamadaṃ parimucya baloktibhi: puramayā ramayā saha kāntayā ||9||
kva nu gata:	where indeed has he gone
paśupāla iti	the cowherd, thus
krudhā kṛtaraṇā	enraged (and) fighting
yadubhi:-ca	by the Yadus, and
jitā:-nṛpā:	won over, the kings
na tu bhavān-	not indeed Thou
udacālyata	were to be swayed
tai:-aho	by them, O what a wonder!
piśunakai:	the wicked ones
śunakai:-iva kesarī	by dogs, just as, the lion
Where indeed has he gone, the cowherd?' Thus the enraged kings shouted and put up a fight. They were defeated by the Yaadavas. O what a wonder! Thou were not swayed in the least by the wicked ones, just as the lion is not swayed by the barking of the dogs.
navasamāgamalajjitamānasāṃ praṇayakautukajṛmbhitamanmathām |
aramaya: khalu nātha yathāsukhaṃ rahasi tāṃ hasitāṃśulasanmukhīm ||10||
tadanu rukmiṇam-	thereafter Rukmi
āgatam-āhave	(who had) come for battle
vadham-upekṣya	to kill refraining
nibadhya virūpayan	binding and disfiguring (him)
hṛta-madam	humbling (his) pride
parimucya	(then) releasing (him)
bala-uktibhi:	by Balaraam's direction
puram-ayā:	came to town
ramayā saha kāntayā	with Ramaa (Thy) wife (Rukmini)
Rukmi then came to battle with Thee. Refraining to kill him, Thou bound him and disfigured him and thus humbled his pride. At the instance of Balaraama Thou released him of his bondage and returned to Thy city Dwaarkaa with Thy wife Rukmini who was Ramaa (Laxmi) herself.
vividhanarmabhirevamaharniśaṃ pramadamākalayan punarekadā |
ṛjumate: kila vakragirā bhavān varatanoratanodatilolatām ||11||
nava-samāgama	newness of being with her husband
lajjita-mānasām	with a shy mind
praṇaya-kautuka-	love and joy
jṛmbhita-manmathām	increasing the passion
aramaya: khalu	sported (Thou) indeed
nātha	O Lord!
yathā-sukhaṃ	so as to (make her) happy
rahasi tāṃ	in private, her
hasita-aṃśula-sanmukhīm	smile rays brightening her face
Rukmini was shyly caught between the new experience of being with her husband and the increased passion caused by the joy of experiencing love. O Lord! Thou sported with her in privacy so as to delight her whose face was beaming with the rays of her smile.
tadadhikairatha lālanakauśalai: praṇayinīmadhikaṃ sukhayannimām |
ayi mukunda bhavaccaritāni na: pragadatāṃ gadatāntimapākuru ||12||
vividha-narmabhi:-	by various jokes
evam-aha:-niśam	thus day and night
pramadam-ākalayan	delight creating
puna:-ekadā	again one day
ṛju-mate:	simple minded (her)
kila vakra-girā	certainly with doubtful words
bhavān	Thou
vara-tano:-atanot-	for the beautiful one created
ati-lolatām	severe agitation
Day and night Thou delighted the beautiful Rukmini by various jokes and pleasant talks. Then one day, by Thy doubtful words the simple minded one was very much agitated.